About Greg Glendell
Phone Greg on 0844 826 8456
(Low-cost call number from a UK landline)
Greg Glendell BSc (Hons)  
I have had a lifelong interest in birds, particularly parrots and studied wild birds in the UK as an amateur ornithologist.  I acquired my first parrot, a blue-fronted Amazon in 1986.  Following my studies in the 1980s, which included modules on human and animal behaviour, I worked in wildlife conservation.  With a career change, I set up my Consultancy in 1999.  I keep several species of parrots including African and Timneh greys, Amazons and a Meyer’s parrot.  My Consultancy is based in Somerset in the UK and I receive much of my work by referral from specialist avian vets in the UK.  I am dedicated to the welfare of parrots and try to help ensure these birds receive the kind of care they so rightly deserve.

I have also appeared on several TV programmes including the BBC's The One Show, and Channel Four's Cutting Edge: Special Needs Pets and written articles for the UK's veterinary journals and for Parrots magazine.

I can help with advice on fostering out birds where a bird’s owner wants to ensure their bird goes to a good home.  I do not breed, buy or sell any birds.

Some customers' comments on taking up my advice on training and on buying my book, Pet Parrots Advice Direct:
Greg and Mr Big, a Meyers Parrot
“Nice to read a book by someone who knows what they are talking about”  N Short, Liecs.

“Your book should be compulsory as it answers all the queries a novice owner has and cannot get elsewhere.”  E Candy, Devon. 

Your book contains so much useful information not mentioned in the usual pet parrot books.”  Barbara Lock,  Essex. 

“The book is very informative and will be greatly used over the years!”  T Hunter, Oxford. 

“Your book is concise, straightforward and gets straight to the point.”  G Dyke, Berks.  
+ photo
============
useful links
www.avianwelfare.org

www.aav.org/vet-lookup/

www.fosterparrots.com

www.parrots.org

www.parrotpassionsuk.com

www.behaviorworks.org

www.skarlettsweb.com

www.projectperry.com

www.allertonvillages.co.uk

www.parrotmag.com

www.dietecuk.co.uk/