Contact and Consultations  Gregs Email Address
To contact Greg, either email him using this link: here , the email address above, or Phone Greg on  0844 826 8456 (Low-cost call number from a UK landline)

Consultations
If you’d like to have an email or phone consultation, please answer the following questions as best as you can, beforehand. There is only a voluntary fee of £20 for a consultation, if you are able to pay for it and you are happy with the advice I offer. However, if payment is difficult, don't let that put you off seeking help for your bird. Thank you.

Form

Your name:

Your email:

Your phone number:

Species of bird; bird's name and age:

Bird's history. Was your bird captive bred, hand reared or parent-reared, or wild-caught? How long have you had the bird?

Does the bird wear a ring? Is this a 'closed' ring or a split ring?

State what the actual problem behaviour is; when it first started, and if the bird does this while you are present. If plucking or screaming, does the bird do this when in or out of the cage? If plucking, which areas are plucked? Please say how you react when you see the bird doing the unwanted behaviour:

Give details of bird's present health; vet's tests and any medication:

Are (or were) the wings ever clipped? Can the bird fly? Does it fly well or clumsily?

What is the size of the bird's cage? State cage height, length and width in inches or centimetres. Where is the cage positioned; against a wall? Any toys, parrot stands used? Is the bird sprayed regularly with water?

Do you have any other pets; dogs, cats or other birds? Are any other birds kept in the same cage or room as the bird in question?

What is the bird fed on? Include any treats given:

Does anyone smoke in the same room as the bird?

Training; does the bird step on and off the hand? What other things does he do with you? Who gets on best with the bird? Does the bird dislike anyone?

Describe the bird's general character; aggressive, bold, nervous, friendly etc…  

How much time does the bird spend out of its cage each day? Is it 'supervised' while out?

If you have any of my books on bird care, please say here, which ones you have read:

======
Thank you for filling the form in. Finally, do you have any thoughts on what the causes of the problem might be?

contact / consultation
To contact Greg, either email him here or phone on 0844 826 8456

